an interview with General H.O. Johnson, Jr.,
Brigadier General, United States Air Force,
retired. Today's date is July 15, 1981. This is
Terry Anderson.
This is our second interview with General
Johnson, Brigadier General, United States Air
Force, retired. Today is July 15th, 1981. This is
Terry Anderson. And last time we were talking
about your job in Great Britain as the Director of
Project Management of the Third Air Force. And you
had written down a couple of things there that you
wanted to talk about that you said were rather
interesting about that job. And then a tape ran
out. Okay.
I think we had talked
about Project Red Richard and the move of
certainly the nuclear force from France over to
England.
At the time that I was forecasted to leave England
and return to the United States, an alert came
through that I was going to be reassigned to the
ROTC program. And when I approached my
supervisor, who was then Colonel Frank Collins,
he suggested that if I knew anybody in the higher
echelons of the personnel business that I contact
them, and he would contact the top civil engineer
who was Major General Minton and see if we couldn't
do something about that. Well, sure enough, the
three-star general who was in charge of personnel
at the time was named Clark, and he happened to be
the wing commander at Chaumont, where I had some
three or four years earlier, served as his
resident engineer. And it seemed that, yes, the
assignment to ROTC was stopped, and Clark and
Minton
made the decision for me to come to the Pentagon. I
was then in a dilemma because I didn't know which
would be the lesser of two evils to go back to ROTC or
to go to the Pentagon because it was my desire to try
to stay as close to engineering as I could for
another few years. I didn't have any idea what I
might get into in the Pentagon. So it happened that
I was assigned as chief of the master planning
branch of civil engineering at headquarters US
Air Force.
It was a very enlightening assignment that I held
for three years. From 1960 to 1963, but before we
get to that job, sir, I'd like to ask you one
question about Red Richard and about storing
nuclear weapons in the United Kingdom. Our first
Polaris submarines were reaching England by 1960
and there was a little bit of anti-nuclear weapon
protests from some factions in the British Maybe
later on, and I was wondering if any of this, if you
had any anti-neutro demonstrations, do you
remember any of this or your feelings on that?
Well, I remember it vividly because it's strange
that you would bring it up without any prompting at
all, but I was given a special assignment for a week
or ten days to accompany two Navy commanders as we
surveyed bases in Scotland and Ireland that had
been made available to us by the British. And since
the Air Force was the point of contact with the
British, it was our job to put somebody with them.
And the three of us went to some 10 or 12 bases that
the British had made available to us to store the
nuclear weapons for the Polaris. The three of us
were the ones that actually made the decision to
put them in Scotland. And there they still are, for
that matter. Now,
as far as the people that were anti were the
minority, most of the people in Scotland, kind of
looked upon it as a blessing in disguise because it
was more employment that other people would have.
We ended up
in a later assignment I don't know what the dates,
you got the dates, when I went back there in 68. 68 to
70. And built a number of houses. We built some 200
houses in Scotland just to support that force.
Those houses were actually not US owned, but
British owned and leased to us. So when I say
British, Scottish is probably a better term to use
than Scotland.
We didn't really feel any hard feelings from the
people. Was this done spectacularized by the
media, that some of these protests? Oh, it always
is, sure.
Okay, I was wondering about that. Okay, now let's
move to Washington, D.C., and tell me about life in
the Pentagon. Well, life in the Pentagon is...
It's a peculiar life. If
there's anything that's different from the
military, it's probably life in the Pentagon,
because you work at different hours. You work
strange hours,
erratic hours, unless you are fortunate enough to
be of a real high rank, and therefore given one of
the few sets of quarters that are available to
support the Pentagon. You live on the economy. And
you make your own private and social life. And
very, very little of it is associated with the
military. You are nothing more than just another
person living in the Washington area. you may or
may not live in a neighborhood where there are
other military people. Certainly there's going
to be other people working for the federal
government, because I guess 60, 70% of them in that
area do work for the federal government. But other
than the fact that you are in either the
headquarters of the Army, Navy, Air Force,
Marines, or Department of Defense, Most of the
time you even wear civilian clothes, and it
doesn't take long to begin to feel that we're in the
world that the military go.
I found the three years to be a very
enlightening three years, both politically,
professionally,
travel-wide and everything else because of some
of the work that we did during the three-year
period.
The one that drew me in closest association with
the other services was
the Army, Navy, and Air Force and Marines had
different agencies and organizations scattered
all over the District of Columbia. They also had,
at that time, quarters for enlisted personnel of
the unmarried type scattered all over the area.
And the Department of Defense took it upon
themselves start a project of consolidating to
try to cut back on the amount of space required
which would also generate a dollar savings and
one of us from each of the four services was placed
on the committee and we worked for some six or eight
months on the project constantly briefing the
local congressmen, that is those from Virginia
and Maryland, how it would affect them as well as
briefing the House Armed Service Committee what
we were doing to the defense establishment in the
District of Columbia. And it did result in a
considerable consolidation and a little more
effective planning for the future because all
four services were going their own way rather than
cooperating with each other and sharing space or
making surplus space available to the other
service. And so did you actually establish? Yes.
What was the name of that? Well, it was known as the
Washington Consolidation Plan. And part of that
plan actually closed Naval Air Station Anacostia
and placed that Navy personnel was there in the
facilities over on Boeing, which gave up part of
the Anacostia base. The only thing that stayed on
Anacostia was a Marine detachment that was
charged with the emergency evacuation of the
President and his family out of the White House.
That installation where their helicopter stayed
But everything else in Anacostia moved off and was
consolidated to other locations. And what was the
end result? Well, the end result, of course, was a
dollar saving and a more effective future
planning by just cutting back one installation in
Anacostia and the D.C. area. Because that land had
been turned back to other public use, taken out of
the defense inventory. Was also the result of a new
agency that was a centralized planning agency?
No, it was not. Why not? Well, there's no reason to
establish an agency that the Department of
Defense is already responsible for. Okay, so it's
all... Now, is this... At the same time, of course,
there were other consolidations going on in the
military. For example, the rise of the Defense
Intelligence Agency, in which they took the
Defense Intelligence Agency from all three
services and put them into one in Washington. Does
this seem like it's part of a pattern, then, to
consolidate and streamline the military during
the early 1960s? Well, yes, it was. Of course, when
the DIA was formed, They didn't require new
quarters. They went into existing army quarters
that were over in Maryland.
Now the task that was assigned to the master
planning branch that I found the most interesting
as far as just the Air Force was concerned and what
constantly had me before committees of Congress
was a program known as the Access Road Program.
Each year, the different services request from
the Congress an appropriation to
support roads that are contiguous to their
installations that are used not only by the their
people on the installations but by the public such
as roads that would lead to randolph air force base
or roads that would lead to bergstrom and what
improvements need to be made to those roads to
carry the traffic actually the cost is born by the
the service concern the big thing at that time of
course is we were now installing the Minuteman
missiles and this required miles and miles and
miles of road improvements to carry the
transporter erector of the Minuteman from the
storage depot to the silo or the location that the
Minuteman would be placed in which the Minuteman
would be placed. Malmstrom Air Force Base was our
first installation and we improved thousands of
miles of road in Montana and all these roads had to
be traveled with Bureau of Public Road People and
state people determined whether or not the road
was sufficient to carry Well, the first thing we
had to do was... You had to turn weight? I beg your
pardon? Because of the vehicle's weight? Not only
weight, but also such thing as the turning rate of
it. So the first thing we had to do was to go out to the
plant where they were making the transporter
erector and fully load one and put it through its
paces and measure everything to see what it took to
turn it and to back it up and so on, on public roads.
Once it got on the installation, handle that, or
into the small square, which was Air Force
property. But on the public roads, we had to
increase the radius on many, many square turn out
there, where in that part of the country, most of
the roads follow league lines. And they're pretty
square as compared to our part of the country,
where roads run diagonal curve down in this part of
Texas. This
Access Road Program became so
much more visible during this period that
with or without my consent, and at that time they
didn't ask people in my grade if they incurred in
certain things, they just said this is the way it's
going to be done. When I moved from that position to
Chief of the Master Planning Branch to the next one
that I had, which was in the office of the Secretary
of the Air Force, they also transferred the
responsibility of the coordination of access
roads from the master planning branch to the
office that I transferred to. And I kept that same
thing the whole time that I was there. Was that
because of the quality of job you were doing? I
don't know. One would like to think so. But I became
known as Access Road Johnson. The staff knew me as
such. If I went in to put on a briefing, will
everybody immediately assume that it was on
access roads? It may not necessarily have been,
but I had the full knowledge of the access roads and
the ear of a couple of the congressmen who followed
it constantly because of the dollars that we were
spending. Who were these congressmen? Harry
Shepard from California was probably the leading
one. chairman of the subcommittee of House
Appropriations. That's where we, of course,
derive our money in. But each, as you can imagine,
Montana is not a very big state. And I don't even
know how many congressmen they have. But every
time we go into an area, naturally, if we're going
to do anything to public roads in a congressional
district, The congressman wanted to know about it
and would have preferred to even make the
announcement. Sometimes that was a little
difficult because we were moving faster than
that. But most of the time, we could cooperate with
him and say, OK, here's what we're going to do.
We're going to improve the roads from here to here.
So they wanted the publicity. Sure. They may or may
not have had anything to do with it, but any time a
congressman can tell his home constituents
something, he gets some credit, whether he
deserves it or not. So it was back and forth from
what we call the Pentagon to up on the hill, and
constantly keeping them. And many, many trips to
the field, again, there were public road people
and state road people and so on because we couldn't
touch the road. We could not let the contract on the
road because they're a public road. We provide the
money and we provide the criteria. This is what
it's got to be raised to in order that we can move it
across. Did you have any problems or was this
carried out? The biggest problem that I had in it, I
was then in the secretary's office and I was
working for A Deputy Assistant Secretary for Air
Force installation named Alan McCone, a
gentleman from Pennsylvania, happens to be
deceased, but now. But the cost of the
improvements of the access roads in Missouri got
to be such a, estimated to be at such a terrific
level that was going to cost four to five times what
we had originally estimated and our estimates had
been based on what it had cost in other locations
but missouri doesn't have the same type of road
base and soils and everything else that malmstrom
has for instance and we had carried our problem to
the
powers to be in the Air Force, and a decision was
made that we would probably relocate the
Minuteman wing to another area. And it fell my
boss's job, Alan McCone, to go tell Senator
Symington that the Minuteman was not going to be
located in Missouri. This is the same as signing
your own death warrant, because Symington was not
only a leader of the Senate, but he was also a former
Secretary of the Air Force. And Mr. McCone chose
not to go alone, but Colonel Johnson was going to go
with him and explain why. Can you tell me about
that? Well, it was interesting. And what year was
this? This is 19...
into the Secretary's office. This would be
between 1963 and 68. Well, it would be immediately
before Kennedy's assassination because with the
assassination, McCone tendered his
resignation. He was a political appointee. So it
would be about October of 1963. This was of the
party and looked like there would be peace and
harmony in the party, but that's not always so.
Simon can sit and listen. He listened to McCone
make the preamble. He listened to part of my
briefing is to back up the preamble as to what was
driving the cost up and so on. And without saying a
word to us, picked up this phone and said, get me
Gene. Gene is Gene Zucker, the Secretary of the Air
Force. The next thing he says, Gene, you've got a
little fat man over here with a colonel and, hey,
what did you say your name was? And pointed to
McCone and said, Alan McCone. Alan McCone. He
tells me you can't put the minute man in Missouri. I
want you to call me back and tell me how we're going
to solve this problem. It's a good day, gentlemen.
And that was the start of how we spent some time
relocating sites in Missouri to pull the costs
down, going back for more money.
Anyway, the Minuteman Wing is located in
Missouri.
Even at a higher cost to the taxpayer? Yes. And
where did you think was the optimal site?
At that time, we weren't looking at other sites. In
other words, I wasn't in the area of trying to
determine where else, because there are too many
things involved. Targeting,
support bays. support bases, maybe. We weren't
looking at other sites. The problem right then and
there was to let Sidington know that it was too
costly. And you may even look back and say, OK, it
was effective because he helped get additional
money. Yeah. It could have been done a lot cheaper
someplace else. The term lot, I don't know, but
it's definitely cheaper as far as road
improvements. And the cost of the roads was such
that we couldn't move it alone. I mean, it took more
than just our decision that it was going to be
moved. But when the Air Force had to put it on the
scale and say, gosh, it could cost that much more,
we've got to find another place, another
location. But that was a... A real interesting
month, six week period of... Were there other
problems with the project? No, not necessarily.
We have...
Well yes, we had one other and that was with Senator
Fulbright in Arkansas.
managed to get through an amendment to the Public
Road Act,
a provision whereby, and they didn't necessarily
spell out airport, but when any of the Department
of Defense forces or elements or some term damaged
public roads, that the public roads would in turn
be restored and paid for by funds from the
Department of Defense. And this caused no end of
concern because we felt that this was an open
book to, gee, there goes an army truck. Let's stick
them for the repair of this road. Well, hell, the
road may have needed repaired for the last four or
five years, sure.
We didn't have any success of stopping the thing.
The amendment did pass. But by the execution of it
through the Bureau of Public Road, we were able to
minimize costs that were thrown back to the
different departments by close surveillance of
the condition of all roads in which we used on a
routine basis. We know whether or not, or have an
idea as to whether, yes, we were responsible for
the damage. Bridge structures are easy to
determine because by the Bureau constantly
inspecting the bridges. And then if we put heavy
loads across for an extended period of time, well,
you could pretty well determine that you're the
guy. But the hearings with Senator Fulbright were
not the most social that I've ever been through. It
was a very difficult
. In what way? uh pretty much like my father he's
setting his ways and he's going to have his way and
he's going to play the game his way or he's going to
take his football and go home of course he was on his
ground which is up on the hill and we're up there
away from the pentagon and
Senate and Congressional hearings are, if the
public could ever see some of them, they would
absolutely be disgusted with the type of people
that they send to Washington because you can
effect when the media says at the Senate hearing
today on so-and-so that Everybody was there, and
it was run right. And sure enough, there'll be one
senator sitting across the table from maybe six or
eight witnesses from the Department of the Air
Force. And this one senator, he's conducting the
hearing. And that's written as if the entire
committee was there, and everything was going on.
And
it's... It's far from the democratic way of doing
things, I think, but that's the way it is. Well, now
that we're on this topic, I wanted to have your
opinion of congressmen as a general group. I mean,
when you were out in Washington dealing with
congressmen, did your opinion of the Congress and
the way our democracy works, those politicians,
did it increase or did it decrease or change in any
way? Well, no, because You realize that from what
we've already said, I grew up in a political
atmosphere. My dad worked for the city and then
making races for the railroad commissioner. I had
known congressmen and known senators and known
people that worked for government. I wouldn't say
that it had any effect on it. I will say that I'm
trying to think of this congressman's name. He was
from
the Tidewater area of Virginia. When we had this
Washington consolidation plan, we had a
breakfast meeting one morning in which we briefed
the committee he was on. And he became the culprit
of the committee that was going to really really
put us all on the spot, and right in the middle of it.
And he could get away with something like this
because we were now on neutral ground. We weren't
on the hill. We weren't in the Pentagon. We were in a
place having breakfast, and blood and breathings
were going on. And right in the middle of all of his
dogmatic questioning, he says, wouldn't you like
to be on my side asking the questions instead of on
your side having to answer?
Showing that the man did have a sense of humor. He
knew that he was a browbeatenist, but no,
I can't say that it's even now.
Would you say you have a high or a low opinion of the
Congress? Neither. I don't have a high opinion of
them. Maybe that's influenced a little bit by
political feelings, and I'm sure it is, because I
think that two of the congressmen that we have from
this general location ought to be replaced, and
I'm tickled to death with one of them, and that's
the political party.
Okay, so much for Congress. Tiger Teague was a
personal friend, and I thought he was pretty good
at that. So much for Congress. Were there other
programs besides the Access Road Program that you
thought was very important in the early 1960s that
you were working on?
Well,
I haven't moved from the master planning branch in
the end to the secretary's office. 1963. And then,
of course, that was in the secretary's office when
we went over to see Simon.
Then following Kennedy's assassination, well,
Allie McComb resigned or tendered his
resignation. It was accepted, and he was replaced
by a
gentleman by the name of Lou Turner, who also is
deceased at this time.
Shortly after Turner came aboard, McNamara
formed or started the base closure, the
retrenchment.
And two of us from Turner's staff were
assigned to the committee to study out and help
determine which air force bases were vulnerable
or which should be considered for closure or for
reduction or whatever
this
this proved to be very interesting and as a
satellite i might say the second person was a
individual by the name of joe meese and uh Joe Meese
now happens to have the job that Mr. Turner had. He
is the Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Air
Force Bar Installations. He has risen on the
ranks.
It was interesting to go through and study and make
the recommendations and have them reviewed by
both what we call the air staff, that's the ones
that are under the chief of staff the four-star
general and then pass to the secretary for his
review and then on to pick him up the department of
defense here's the product from the air force and
so on and then sit at department of defense and see
what's coming in from the other the Army, the Navy,
and the Marines. And what did you think were some of
the bases that could have been closed? Do you
remember some of those bases? You probably
traveled around. We traveled, yeah. And did a lot
of evaluation. Do you remember what those bases
were? Oh, I can go back and look in the files that I
have, but just to start calling them, because we
closed a number of bases. The one that we kept
trying to close but they wouldn't let us close was
Ellington. Of course, the reason they wouldn't
let us close is it was in direct support of NASA, but
it was straight Air Force funding that was keeping
Ellington open and keeping a colonel and a staff
down there, and when you've got military people,
you end up with a PX and the commissary, and sure, so
you've got the base open. And so having the base,
then you start looking for some type of troops, and
we ended up putting reserve forces in there that
flew on the weekends, things like the National
Guard unit, and then you've got the base
flourishing again. But sure, we said close it, but
we could never close it. But one of the most
interesting things that took place was in this
exercise
was there was a leak in one of the other services.
I don't recall whether it was Army or Navy, but it
was one of the two. And this was, of course, the last
thing that McNamara wanted was that there be
absolutely tight security until public
announcement was made After that, it was a fait
accompli. No turn back. This is what's going to
happen. The decision has been made, and pop.
Anytime there's a leak, you always throw yourself
wide open to second thoughts, power groups coming
in, do this, do that, and so on. So our boss, Mr.
Turner, was a man that had spent many, many years in
the Air Force, In fact, it had started as a GS-1 or 2
and had come up through the ranks and left the Air
Force probably as a GS-15 and went into public to
private practice working for a contractor out in
California and had spent three years out there.
When McCone resigned, well, Zucker called Turner
and back and asked him if he would like to have this
particular
job. He knew a lot about the Air Force. He knew a lot
about the Department of Defense, unlike most
political appointees that come in and then spend
their first six months behind the learning curve.
But we went to the boss and told him of the leak. and
told him of the pressure that was being put on us.
And he hit upon a very clever idea in which we called
General Cappucci over to the office to discuss it
with him. Now, General Cappucci was the head, at
that time, was the head of The Air Force OSI, which
is the Office of Special Investigation, they're
the ones that run all of our background
clearances. They are the secret police, whatever
you want to call them, in the Air Force. I think in
the Army it's called the
Army Security Agency, ASA or something. They have
their own codes.
Their agents are the only ones that can decode a
message. And you will find a detachment of the OSI
on every Air Force base or major installation, the
difference being base has a runway, installation
does not have a runway.
For instance, my son is the detachment commander
right now of the OSI at a base in England, and there
are three agents on that base. He's the top. But
they maintain their own code. And we proposed to
Cappucci that the Air Force instructions would go
out through his channel and not through the normal
communication channels. Now you can, right
quick, anybody in mathematics can figure out how
many people that's knocked out of knowledge of
what's in that coded message. First, code in
Washington. How many people would have known what
was in the message? And then when the message got to
the base, how many people would see the message,
either before it's coded, after it was decoded,
and then pass to the commander through his
secretary or through his adjutant who would then
have knowledge. Whereas the agents working in the
OSI would receive the coded message, decode it,
and he himself walked to the base commander and
say, sir, this message has come for you through my
channel.
If that were broken, then we're in trouble. So we
used that system and needless to say, there was no
security. There were other security leaks later
on in two of the services, but none in the airport.
But again, this took an awful lot of close work with
Capucci and his people.
And the main thing was that the Air Force
wanted to be sure that when trying to reach for a
base, just by memory, that when McNamara
announced that Air Force Base X would close and the
media hit the commander of Base X ten minutes later
and the colonel sits there and says, I don't know
anything about it, he was knowledgeable. He knew
it was going to close. we don't like to put our
people in the spotlight right and uh so they were
just as knowledgeable as it could be but under
certain limitations so you thought that the way
that this was handled by mcnamara was effectively
very definitely uh like i said a while ago if
you and i know uh this the history that you're
reporting, is that oftentimes leaks are
deliberate. Yeah. But a leak in this instance is
the worst thing that could have happened. Because
like I said, if pressure droops the chance to come
back and appeal, take a second look, if the
Secretary of Defense is knowledgeable and
capable as McNamara would his staff, different
staff or services all got together and made the
decision within the ground rules, we've got the
attitude and the climate and the money we've got
got to cut back. These are the ones that are going
outside help can only hinder to the decision
making process.
Later on the Years later, when I was in Department
of Defense, the Army made a decision to close a
certain base. It was announced, and it was put on
what's called the reserve list. That meant that
the base had to sit there and couldn't be utilized
for anything by permanent change of the facility.
Well, the people of that area came to Department of
Defense and said, look. And it was strange,
because that particular assistant secretary had
me in the office with him. And he said, I want you to
speak to this whenever you can. And on one side of
the room, the contingent from Mineral Wells,
right here in Texas, the one I mentioned the other
day, We had it for the Aviation and Air Force. When
the Army took it, they made a helicopter school out
of it. And of course, the Army closed that school
and moved everything to Alabama and put it in one
school where they were operating two. And half of
this continued for mental well. These people over
on this side of the room said, please don't close
it. We can prove that we can train helicopter
pilots cheaper than they can train them over in
Alabama. People over on this side of the room said,
but sir, if you close it, don't put it on the reserve
list. Leave it to us so that we can bring industry in
and use the facilities to help the community. So
here, this contingent for mineral wells was
split. But don't close it. If you do close it, take
it off the list. And of course, all the secretary
can do is say, sir, it's closed. I'll try to help
you. Sure.
You get the feeling for these people, but you've
got to remember first that we're still in the
defense business. I was wondering about your
thoughts about the very controversial Secretary
of Defense, Matthew Brown. You had a lot of
dealings with him. Well,
I can tell you a story that Maybe we'll
put in a very few words.
The Assistant Secretary that
that my boss worked for of the Air Force. Having a
meeting in his office one day, I'll read you in a
minute. And he was sitting at the head of the table,
and immediately to his left was my boss, Mr.
Turner. And then the table was surrounded by other
high-ranking officers and civilians. I was
sitting across the table from Mr. Turner, and
therefore I was on On the Secretary's right hand.
On McNamara's? No. This was the Assistant
Secretary of the Air Force. And McNamara and
Johnson had just pulled something that even their
own administration and Department of Defense and
the Air Force were just absolutely disgusting.
They just went against the grain.
President Johnson. President Johnson. And this
assistant secretary had sounded off, even though
he was of the party and of that administration. He
sounded off and spoke bitterly against it and then
turned to Mr. Turner and said, Lou, what do you
think about that? Do you remember what the issue
was? No, I don't. And Lou sounded off. And then it
proceeded to go all the way around the table. And
the guy on my right said something. I didn't say
anything. The secretary turned to me and he said,
Huh? Just because you're the lowest rank at the
table, that doesn't mean you have...